Music store demo (#32)
kiali/demos: music-store/README.adoc

== Quick Start

Start a Minikube instance:

[source,bash]
----
minikube start --memory=8g --cpus=4
----

Install Istio and its addons:

[source,bash]
----
istioctl install --set profile=demo -y

kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.10/samples/addons/prometheus.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.10/samples/addons/grafana.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.10/samples/addons/jaeger.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.10/samples/addons/kiali.yaml
----

A very simple microservice architecture based on https://github.com/leandroberetta/mimik[Mimik] will be used to demonstrate the concepts:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl create namespace music-store
kubectl label namespace music-store istio-injection=enabled

kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leandroberetta/demos/master/music-store/ui.yaml -n music-store
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leandroberetta/demos/master/music-store/backend.yaml -n music-store
----

> 

Reviewer: When I was following the steps in this README, I was getting errors down below in the `for i in {1..100};` loop that curls the endpoint - that was because I didn't wait for the pods to start.

So I suggest adding this here:

```suggestion

Wait for the music-store pods to become available:
[source,bash]
----
kubectl wait -n music-store --for condition=available deployment/music-store-backend-v1
kubectl wait -n music-store --for condition=available deployment/music-store-ui-v1
----

```

The next step is to add a traffic management rule, for example a fault injection in the backend to start returning a 500 error in every request:

[source,bash]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  hosts:
    - "*"
  gateways:
    - music-store
  http:
    - match:
        - uri:
            exact: /      
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-ui            
            port:
              number: 8080
    - match:
        - uri:
            prefix: /api
      fault:
        abort:
          httpStatus: 500
          percentage:
            value: 100
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-backend            
            port:
              number: 8080
EOF
----

Inspect the graph in Kiali:

image:doc/s2.png[Scenario 2]

Notice that the rule is applying to the external client only but the internal client (the UI) is still working good. 

This behaviour is expected because in the backend's VirtualService there is a missing configuration for the rule to affect internal traffic.

> In the VirtualService, the only gateway that is configured is the one that is related to the Ingress Gateway (external traffic getting into the mesh), so internal traffic is not being controlled by this rule, to fix this situation, an special value "mesh" can be configured in the gateways list as follows:

Reviewer: I would split up this run-on sentence. And correct the typo "an special value"  -- this should be "a special value":
```suggestion
In the VirtualService, the only gateway that is configured is the one that is related to the Ingress Gateway (external traffic getting into the mesh). This means internal traffic is not being controlled by this rule. To fix this situation, a special value "mesh" can be configured in the gateways list as follows:
```

[source,bash]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  hosts:
    - "*"
  gateways:
    - music-store
    - mesh
  http:
    - match:
        - uri:
            exact: /      
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-ui            
            port:
              number: 8080
    - match:
        - uri:
            prefix: /api
      fault:
        abort:
          httpStatus: 500
          percentage:
            value: 100
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-backend            
            port:
              number: 8080
EOF
----

> The previous command won't work and that is because as the error indicates, the "mesh" gateway is not allowed to be used when a wildcard host (*) is also configured, so to fix this situation, apply the following configuration that changes the wildcard for the two possible hosts that consumes the backend:

Reviewer: Split up the run-on sentence,  document the error message they should expect to see, and some other little things to reword this:

```suggestion
The previous command should fail with the following error: `admission webhook "validation.istio.io" denied the request: configuration is invalid: wildcard host * is not allowed for virtual services bound to the mesh gateway`. As the error indicates, the "mesh" gateway is not allowed to be used when a wildcard host (`"*"`) is also configured. To fix this situation, change the above command by replacing the wildcard with the two possible hosts that consumes the backend:
```

[source,bash]
----
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  hosts:
    - $(minikube ip)
    - music-store-backend.music-store.svc.cluster.local
  gateways:
    - music-store
    - mesh
  http:
    - match:
        - uri:
            exact: /      
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-ui            
            port:
              number: 8080
    - match:
        - uri:
            prefix: /api
      fault:
        abort:
          httpStatus: 500
          percentage:
            value: 100
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-backend            
            port:
              number: 8080
EOF 
----

> Inpect the graph in Kiali again and observe that the rule is applying for both external and internal calls to the backend:

Reviewer: typo:
```suggestion
Inspect the graph in Kiali again and observe that the rule is applying for both external and internal calls to the backend:
```

= Music Store Demo

A demonstration about how traffic rules are applied on internal and external traffic. These scenarios can be managed and observed by Kiali. 

== Platform Install

This demo has been tested using https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/platform-setup/minikube/[Minikube] and https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/istioctl/#install-a-different-profile[Istio 1.10 Demo Profile].

== Quick Start

Start a Minikube instance:

[source,bash]
----
minikube start --memory=8g --cpus=4
----

Install OLM (required to install the microservices):

[source,bash]
----
minikube addons enable olm

> ----

Author: Thanks for your comments, strange about the echo command, i'm using Fedora and bash too.

Regarding olm, I thought it was broken on Minikube 1.19, but yes, i'm not specifying to use the latest version, I think it's better  to point to the yaml installation directly and avoid the addon.

> ----

Reviewer: > Thanks for your comments, strange about the echo command, i'm using Fedora and bash too.

I don't know why I am getting that. I tried a similar (smaller) example and it worked. Strange. I would just switch to using here-docs, simply because that's how I've always seen examples and it makes it more readable (the first line of the yaml appears on the same line as the "echo" and you have to wrap the whole thing in quotes which isn't truly part of the yaml).

Install Istio and its addons:

[source,bash]
----
istioctl install --set profile=demo -y

kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.10/samples/addons/prometheus.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.10/samples/addons/grafana.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.10/samples/addons/jaeger.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.10/samples/addons/kiali.yaml
----

Install https://github.com/leandroberetta/mimik[Mimik] (a tool to create generic microservices and connect them to form service meshes):

[source,bash]
----

> echo "apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
> kind: CatalogSource
> metadata:
>   name: mimik-catalog
>   namespace: olm
> spec:
>   sourceType: grpc
>   image: quay.io/leandroberetta/mimik-operator-index:v0.0.1" | kubectl apply -f -

Reviewer: This command does not work. It results in:

```
$ echo "apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
> kind: CatalogSource
> metadata:
>   name: mimik-catalog
>   namespace: olm
> spec:
>   sourceType: grpc
>   image: quay.io/leandroberetta/mimik-operator-index:v0.0.1" | kubectl apply -f -
error: error validating "STDIN": error validating data: kind not set; if you choose to ignore these errors, turn validation off with --validate=false
```

You should use cat with a [here-doc](https://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/here-docs.html):

```suggestion
cat <<EOM | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: CatalogSource
metadata:
  name: mimik-catalog
  namespace: olm
spec:
  sourceType: grpc
  image: quay.io/leandroberetta/mimik-operator-index:v0.0.1
EOM
```

> echo "apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
> kind: Subscription
> metadata:
>   name: mimik-subscription
>   namespace: operators 
> spec:
>   channel: alpha
>   installPlanApproval: Automatic
>   name: mimik-operator
>   source: mimik-catalog
>   sourceNamespace: olm" | kubectl apply -f -

Reviewer: As above, use cat + here-doc:

```suggestion
cat <<EOM | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: mimik-subscription
  namespace: operators 
spec:
  channel: alpha
  installPlanApproval: Automatic
  name: mimik-operator
  source: mimik-catalog
  sourceNamespace: olm
EOM
```

----

A very simple microservice architecture will be used to demonstrate the concepts (a backend and a UI):

[source,bash]
----
kubectl create namespace music-store
kubectl label namespace music-store istio-injection=enabled

> echo "apiVersion: mimik.veicot.io/v1alpha1
> kind: Mimik
> metadata:
>   name: music-store-ui-v1
>   namespace: music-store
> spec:
>   service: music-store-ui
>   version: v1
>   endpoints:
>     - path: /
>       method: GET
>       connections:
>         - service: music-store-backend
>           port: 8080
>           path: api
>           method: GET" | kubectl apply -f -
> echo "apiVersion: mimik.veicot.io/v1alpha1
> kind: Mimik
> metadata:
>   name: music-store-backend-v1
>   namespace: music-store
> spec:
>   service: music-store-backend
>   version: v1
>   endpoints:
>     - path: /api
>       method: GET
>       connections: []" | kubectl apply -f -          

Reviewer: again, use here-doc to avoid errors:

```suggestion
cat <<EOM | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: mimik.veicot.io/v1alpha1
kind: Mimik
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui-v1
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  service: music-store-ui
  version: v1
  endpoints:
    - path: /
      method: GET
      connections:
        - service: music-store-backend
          port: 8080
          path: api
          method: GET
EOM

cat <<EOM | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: mimik.veicot.io/v1alpha1
kind: Mimik
metadata:
  name: music-store-backend-v1
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  service: music-store-backend
  version: v1
  endpoints:
    - path: /api
      method: GET
      connections: []
```

export INGRESS_HOST=$(minikube ip)
export GATEWAY_URL=$INGRESS_HOST:$INGRESS_PORT
export MUSIC_STORE_UI=http://$GATEWAY_URL/
export MUSIC_STORE_BACKEND=http://$GATEWAY_URL/api
----

Create the following Istio routing resources:

[source,bash]
----
echo "apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: music-store
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  selector:
    istio: ingressgateway
  servers:
    - port:
        number: 80
        name: http
        protocol: HTTP
      hosts:
        - \"*\"" | kubectl apply -f -

echo "apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  hosts:
    - \"*\"
  gateways:
    - music-store
  http:
    - match:
        - uri:
            exact: /      
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-ui            
            port:
              number: 8080
    - match:
        - uri:
            prefix: /api
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-backend            
            port:

>               number: 8080" | kubectl apply -f -        

Reviewer: use here-docs here, too

[source,bash]
----
for i in {1..100}; 
do 
  echo "UI request $i"
  curl $MUSIC_STORE_UI | jq
  echo "Backend request $i"
  curl $MUSIC_STORE_BACKEND | jq
  sleep 1
done
----

Inspect the graph in Kiali and expect the following topology:

image:doc/s1.png[Scenario 1]

Notice that the backend is consumed by an external client (through the ingress gateway) and also by the UI.

The next step is to add a traffic management rule, for example a fault injection in the backend to start returning a 500 error in every request:

[source,bash]
----
echo "apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  hosts:
    - \"*\"
  gateways:
    - music-store
  http:
    - match:
        - uri:
            exact: /      
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-ui            
            port:
              number: 8080
    - match:
        - uri:
            prefix: /api
      fault:
        abort:
          httpStatus: 500
          percentage:
            value: 100
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-backend            
            port:

>               number: 8080" | kubectl apply -f -   

Reviewer: use here-doc here, too

This behaviour is expected because in the backend's VirtualService there is a missing configuration for the rule to affect internal traffic.

In the VirtualService, the only gateway that is configured is the one that is related to the Ingress Gateway (external traffic getting into the mesh), so internal traffic is not being controlled by this rule, to fix this situation, an special value "mesh" can be configured in the gateways list as follows:

[source,bash]
----
echo "apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  hosts:
    - \"*\"
  gateways:
    - music-store
    - mesh
  http:
    - match:
        - uri:
            exact: /      
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-ui            
            port:
              number: 8080
    - match:
        - uri:
            prefix: /api
      fault:
        abort:
          httpStatus: 500
          percentage:
            value: 100
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-backend            
            port:

>               number: 8080" | kubectl apply -f -   

Reviewer: use here-doc

----

The previous command won't work and that is because as the error indicates, the "mesh" gateway is not allowed to be used when a wildcard host (*) is also configured, so to fix this situation, apply the following configuration that changes the wildcard for the two possible hosts that consumes the backend:

[source,bash]
----
echo "apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  hosts:
    - $(minikube ip)
    - music-store-backend.music-store.svc.cluster.local
  gateways:
    - music-store
    - mesh
  http:
    - match:
        - uri:
            exact: /      
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-ui            
            port:
              number: 8080
    - match:
        - uri:
            prefix: /api
      fault:
        abort:
          httpStatus: 500
          percentage:
            value: 100
      route:
        - destination:
            host: music-store-backend            
            port:

>               number: 8080" | kubectl apply -f -   

Reviewer: use here-doc

  namespace: operators 
spec:
  channel: alpha
  installPlanApproval: Automatic
  name: mimik-operator
  source: mimik-catalog
  sourceNamespace: olm" | kubectl apply -f -
----

A very simple microservice architecture will be used to demonstrate the concepts (a backend and a UI):

[source,bash]
----
kubectl create namespace music-store
kubectl label namespace music-store istio-injection=enabled

echo "apiVersion: mimik.veicot.io/v1alpha1
kind: Mimik
metadata:
  name: music-store-ui-v1
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  service: music-store-ui
  version: v1
  endpoints:
    - path: /
      method: GET
      connections:
        - service: music-store-backend
          port: 8080
          path: api
          method: GET" | kubectl apply -f -
echo "apiVersion: mimik.veicot.io/v1alpha1
kind: Mimik
metadata:
  name: music-store-backend-v1
  namespace: music-store
spec:
  service: music-store-backend
  version: v1
  endpoints:
    - path: /api
      method: GET
      connections: []" | kubectl apply -f -          
----

Configure the following entries in the /etc/hosts to consume the services:

[source,bash]
----
echo "$(minikube ip) ui.music.store" | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts

> echo "$(minikube ip) backend.music.store" | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts

Reviewer: Because you are asking people to edit their DNS entries directly on their local machine, I would put a big warning message here or something that shouts loudly in order to indicate this part requires root access and will modify their DNS entries that affects their local machine.

Also, at the end of this README, because you are touching the host machine's config, you should have a "Cleanup" section and tell them to go into `/etc/hosts` and remove those entries.

Author: Hi @jmazzitelli, thanks for the comment, I will try to remove this requirement if possible, but I need to do some testing, I'll be back!.

Author: @jmazzitelli I removed the need of toucing the /etc/hosts!.
